You fall asleep fine, but at 2 or 3:00
a.m. your eyes snap open, heart racing,
brain on, wide awake. You think it's
stress. It's not. It's cortisol at the
wrong time. And when cortisol spikes at
night, it shuts off melatonin, blocks
growth hormone, and pushes your body
into fat storage mode. Tonight, I'll
show you the exact mineral, the exact
dose, and the exact timing that shuts
that spike down. Because this isn't a
sleep problem, it's a hormone problem.
So, let's fix it. You see, you have two
opposing hormones. Cortisol, which is a
morning hormone, and melatonin, which is
a night hormone. They cannot coexist.
When cortisol rises, melatonin
decreases. Now, here's what triggers
that 2 to 3 a.m. spike. Blood sugar
drops during the night. Then, your body
senses that drop as dangerous. So, your
adrenal glands fire off cortisol as an
emergency alarm because cortisol raises
blood sugar by pulling glucose from the
liver and boom, you're wide awake, not
groggy, just simply awake. That's
because cortisol is activating. And
every nighttime cortisol spike, blocks
human growth hormone, raises insulin,
increases visceral fat storage, that
nasty white fat around your organs, the
most dangerous fat in your body. It also
suppresses testosterone production, bad
for men and women, and elevates
inflammatory markers and cytoines. Now,
this isn't a sleep issue. It's just your
hormones are misfiring. And if you're
over 35 and especially over 50, this
actually becomes more common. Why?
Because adrenal resilience declines with
age. Mineral status declines with age,
and stress load increases with age. So
this random wake up time in the middle
of the night is actually metabolic
instability. So let's discuss why most
sleep advice doesn't fix this. Melatonin
supplements, they don't override or
taper down cortisol. You see, if
cortisol spikes, melatonin loses. What
about breathing exercises? Sure, they're
helpful, but they don't correct a
mineral deficiency. What about sleeping
pills? Yeah, they sedate the brain. They
don't regulate hormones. They don't get
to the cause. You see, you cannot
outreax a biochemical imbalance. And
here's what no one emphasizes. Your
adrenal glands depend on one key mineral
to shut off cortisol. What do you think
it is? Let it sink in. There's a
specific mineral your nervous system
requires to hit the brake pedal. And 70
to 80% of people are deficient in this
key mineral. That mineral is magnesium.
Magnesium is not just for relaxation. It
regulates adrenal output. It is required
for GABA activation. This is a calming
neurotransmitter. Magnesium also helps
to convert serotonin into melatonin.
Magnesium also activates the
parasympathetic nervous system, which is
the rest, digest, detoxification part of
your nervous system. So, magnesium is
the brake pedal. Now, here's the vicious
cycle. Stress burns magnesium. Cheap
coffee burns magnesium. Drinking alcohol
burns magnesium. Poor sleep burns
magnesium. And even intense workouts,
especially too close to bedtime, burns
magnesium. So what happens? Stress,
magnesium loss, higher cortisol, worse
sleep, more magnesium loss. And the
cycle continues. And data shows that
roughly 70% of Americans don't meet
magnesium intake levels. And magnesium
deficiency has been linked to elevated
levels of inflammatory markers like
HSCP, also linked to insulin resistance.
and of course poor sleep quality. And
this is shown in multiple human studies.
Magnesium is actually responsible for
over 400 activities in your body. So if
you're deficient, that's over 400 things
your body cannot do efficiently. Now,
magnesium feels essential, doesn't it?
Not just optional. So here's the exact
protocol to get to the root cause here
and fix this issue. Take 300 to 400 mg
of elemental magnesium. Take that about
60 to 90 minutes before bed. Some good
forms are glycinate, thrienate or
turate. You want to avoid magnesium
oxide. It's poorly absorbed. And
magnesium citrate is more for bowel
release constipation. And this is not
ideal because it might wake you up to
pee. And timing matters here because if
you take it too late, you miss the
cortisol suppression window. You see,
magnesium increases gabone and reduces
that fight-or-flight sympathetic output.
Clinical trials show that magnesium
supplementation improves sleep
efficiency and reduces early morning
awakening, particularly in older adults.
See, it lowers nighttime cortisol,
especially in those who are deficient in
magnesium. See, this is foundational.
Magnesium restores the brake pedal. Now,
we regulate output, but we must also fix
timing and triggers. So, here's some
other things you can do. Tip number one
for you. Morning sunlight. Within 10 to
20 minutes of waking up, even if it's
overcast outside, you want to get
sunlight through your eyes, meaning no
sunglasses. Research from Circadium
Biology shows that morning sunlight
anchors your cortisol rhythm. And you
want high cortisol within range in the
morning, and you want low cortisol
within range at night. Magnesium
regulates that output. Sunlight sets the
timing. Tip number two for you here is
to stabilize your blood sugar,
especially at dinner. Your last meal of
the day, dinner, should be at least 3
hours away from bed. And it should
include around 30 to 40 g of protein.
You want to avoid eating too many
carbohydrates at night. Avoid massive
glucose spikes. And if you find yourself
eating a lot of carbs at night, go for
around a 10 to 15 minute walk after that
meal. All of this will help prevent a
blood sugar spike and crash, meaning no
adrenal alarm in the middle of the
night. Magnesium lowers that spike and
stable blood sugars prevent the trigger.
And tip number three here for you is to
reduce ultrarocessed inflammatory foods
because inflammation increases cortisol
demand. So avoid foods that have
ingredients that you cannot pronounce.
Avoid vegetable oils, seed oils,
packaged boxed foods. Eat real food as
much as possible. Single ingredient
whole foods. Keep it simple. No need to
feel overwhelmed here. Now, here's the
problem. Waking up between 2 and 3:00
a.m. means the heart is racing, the mind
is fully on, and you're exhausted the
next day. And if you grab a random
magnesium at the store or on Amazon, it
probably won't fix it. That's because
most magnesium supplements include oxide
or other forms of magnesium that really
absorb poorly inside the body and they
underdose them at around 100 to 150
milligs or they don't use nervous system
focused forms of magnesium. So people
try magnesium and they say it didn't
work Ben. No, it wasn't the right form
or the right dose. That's why I
personally use and recommend myioscience
magnesium. It's clinically dosed at the
300 to 400 milligrams of the elemental
range that you want to hit. And it uses
highly bioavailable forms of magnesium
like glycinate and thriionate. And what
I also love about it, it's third-party
tested. No junk, no oxide, no
underdosing. And it works the first
night you use it. I've read messages
from my clients who I've recommended
this to, and they've said me, they've
sent me messages like, "For the first
time in years, I've slept 8 hours
without waking up." That's what happens
when you restore the brake pedal. And if
this lesson made something click for
you, don't overthink it. Hey, click the
first link in the description box below
or scan the QR code on the screen and
let me show you how simple this is. Once
you do that, it'll take you to this page
here where you'll see the Myioscience
Optimize Magnesium. You can learn more
about it by flipping through the photos
here, and it's got over uh 96 five-star
reviews. You could subscribe or hit
onetime purchase. I'm going to do
one-time purchase. I'm going to get a
large bottle and add to the cart. I
usually pair this with the vitamin D.
You can see right below and K2. It pairs
really nicely. And vitamin D is so
important. Not just a vitamin, but a
steroid hormone. So, I'm going to add
the large. This is optional, but I'll
add that. And then I'm going to hit
check out at the bottom. And here's a
cool thing. Myocience is giving you an
exclusive discount. They don't publicly
offer anywhere else. So, when you scroll
down here and go to add discount, you're
going to type in freedom fr e d o m and
hit apply and you'll get 20% off your
entire order. What you'll do is fill out
your payment information, your shipping
address. That's it. Should take you 30
seconds or less. And then once you get
it, you'll take it that same night and
you'll see the dosage of how much to
take on the actual bottle. And when you
do this right, cortisol drops at night
and growth hormone rises. You burn more
fat. Testosterone increases. You build
more lean muscle mass. Fat burning
increases. Inflammation lowers and you
wake up feeling energized. Let your
sleep prove it. Look, you're not broken.
Your body is just responding to stress
load, mineral depletion, circadian
disruption. Fix the mineral, fix the
rhythm, and hormones normalize. When
cortisol drops at night, you get all
these wonderful benefits. This isn't
necessarily about sleep hygiene. It's
about hormonal precision. And in my next
lesson, I'm going to show you what
chronically elevated levels of nighttime
cortisol does to belly fat and
testosterone, especially if you're over
40, and how to reverse it. But until
then, magnesium is the brake pedal.
Sunlight sets the timing. Stable blood
sugar prevents the triggers. Your body
wants restorative fat burning sleep.
Give it what it needs. Now, I'm going to
address the questions you submitted on
this exact topic to give you more
clarity and insight. If cortisol is high
at night, why don't I feel stressed?
Well, cortisol isn't technically a
feeling stressed hormone. It's a
metabolic survival hormone. You can have
elevated nighttime cortisol due to blood
sugar dips, magnesium deficiency,
circadian rhythm disruption, and just
overall inflammation. And this could all
happen without feeling anxious or
stressed. In fact, research shows in
research on human beings, by the way,
that cortisol follows a circadian rhythm
independent of physiological stress,
according to Whitesmen in the journal of
clinical endocrinology metabolism. So,
you could be emotionally calm but
metabolically unstable. How exactly does
low blood sugar wake me up? When glucose
spikes from that last meal that you eat
and then you go to bed, there's going to
be a sharp crash in that glucose. That
typically happens between two and 3:00
a.m. And when this happens, your brain
perceives this as a threat. Then the
brain, the hypothalamus, pituitary,
communicate to the adrenals. This is
called the HPA axis. And it stimulates
gluconneogenesis, the production of new
glucose. And it does this by breaking
down liver glycogen stored sugar in the
liver and by raising your blood sugar
back up through stress hormones. Study
published in diabetes care showed that
nocturnal hypoglycemia increases
cortisol and epinephrine release. Can
melatonin fix this? I'm a big fan of
melatonin. Melatonin is not just for
sleep. It's probably the most important
antioxidant for your mitochondria. But
melatonin doesn't override cortisol.
Cortisol spikes even when you take
melatonin. Melatonin shuts off.
Melatonin may help you fall asleep, but
it does not correct that adrenal
trigger. Why do I wake up specifically
at 2 to 3:00 a.m.? Well, Chinese
medicine calls this time liver time in
Chinese medicine. This is when your
liver is very active. And that liver is
doing really important processes. It's
helping you burn fat. It's helping you
recycle something called bile. It's
helping you detoxify. So if magnesium is
low or blood sugar is unstable at this
time, the process that your liver should
be going through gets blocked. This is
very common with people who are
metabolically inflexible. Does nighttime
cortisol cause belly fat? Yes, because
you get less growth hormone, less
testosterone, less deep sleep, and
cortisol. Have you ever heard of the
cortisol belly? It's a real thing. There
are two to three as many receptor sites
for the stress hormone cortisol in your
belly fat, specifically your visceral
fat, than other areas in your body.
Cortisol directly promotes visceral fat,
insulin resistance, and fat storage.
Now, before I get to the next question,
let me give you a free resource here
that's going to help lower cortisol,
balance your blood sugar, and lower
inflammation. If you've tried everything
to lose the last 10 lbs and nothing is
working, stop what you are doing. This
simple egg-based protocol has helped
thousands of my students torch fat, cut
cravings, and drop up to 10 pounds in
just seven days. No starvation, no
tracking, no BS. It works by hacking
your metabolism using eggs, healthy
fats, and strategic intermittent fasting
to put your body into deep fat burning
mode. This is metabolic warfare, and
it's free. Simply click the third link
in the description box below or scan the
QR code on the screen to get your free
guide right now. You're just seven days
away from seeing real change in the
mirror. Now, let's get to the next
question. Can high cortisol at night
increase inflammation? 100% yes. Studies
show that high levels of cortisol,
especially at the wrong time, can
increase inflammatory markers like HSCP,
IL6, and even insulin resistance. How
fast will magnesium fix this? If you are
one of the 70 to 80% of people that are
deficient, you'll notice an improvement
that first night, but huge improvements
within the first seven nights of doing
this. Clinical studies done on magnesium
and sleep improvements show improvements
within 1 to 4 weeks. But the results
depend on the dose of the magnesium, the
form, the timing, your blood sugar
stability, and if you get the morning
sunlight or not. As you recall,
magnesium restores that brake pedal. But
if you keep slamming the gas by eating
too close to bed, eating inflammatory
carbohydrates at night, getting too much
blue light during the day, and not
getting enough sunshine, the results
will be limited. So, make sure you do it
the right way. Click the first link down
below and use the coupon code freedom
for my favorite magnesium supplement. I
want to thank you so much for watching
and listening to this entire episode.
Share it with somebody you know, and I
can't wait for you to comment down below
with your improved results with your
sleep. And speaking of insulin
resistance, I just put together an
entire game plan, a video, a lesson on
what I would do in 2026 if I had insulin
resistance. The exact plan step by step
with no fluff. Here's a clip from that
video. Then click the video on the
screen coming up, and I'll see you in
that next lesson. I've applied this to
thousands of clients to help them
reverse insulin resistance, drop weight
fast, and finally feel like themselves
again. Late night eating is one of the
biggest drivers to insulin resistance
and belly fat because when you eat too
close to bed, insulin stays elevated.